This is Blaise Pascal.
French mathematician.
Inventor.
Scientist.
Philosopher.
Way back in the seventeenth century.
He talked about something very beautiful,
very short.
It seems he once said, “If I’d had more
time, I would’ve written a shorter letter!”
He says, he would have made it SHORTER!
There is something beautiful about this shortness.
Brevity.
Thirukkural, for example.
Perhaps, I think, there is nothing shorter
and at the same time more profound, in this
world of literature, anywhere else!
It is about a short book like that, that we
are going to talk about today.
Namaste!
Four hundred and forty five is about short
bits of advice.
Specifically, it is about this book.
Not even by a famous author, actually.
I went searching and I couldn’t really locate
this man, online.
We have struggled once like this, earlier
too!
Peter Atkins is the not-so-famous author of
this interesting book.
The name of the book itself, attracted me
much.
“Life is short, and so is this book”.
Pretty short.
Formed of twelve chapters.
About life-lessons learned in the school of
hard knocks.
He has put those life-lessons together, and
added some little tidbits from his own life,
and famous quotes from some famous people,
and created this little book.
We are going to have a fleeting tour of the
twelve chapters that can be found in this
book.
The first advice is “Create Space”.
We have encountered this earlier too.
Give space.
Give elbow room.
Wiggle room.
The classic example is that of a bottle.
If a bottle, the fizz bottle, carbonated drink,
if it has to bubble out explosively, it is
not enough to have liquid.
You need some space.
Because, that is where the action is.
The air — liquid contact membrane.
That is where the action happens.
So, give some space.
Cut some slack.
Do not pour everything about you into whatever
you take up.
Einstein himself — have you listened to
him play the violin?
It might sound unbearably jarring!
You may not be able to tolerate Einstein’s
violin.
But, he tolerated it.
His neighbours tolerated it.
Thank God they did.
Because, that is what gave him space.
He has been thinking about a lot of very complicated
things.
But, for all those pieces to fall in place,
you need to get away from it all, once in
a while.
Create Space.
Try not to worry!
There are too many things that are not in
your control.
Do what you can, to the best of your ability.
And, when it looks like you have no influence
over what’s going to happen, sit back and
enjoy the show.
Watch it unfold in front of you.
Do not worry.
It is the rocking chair that comes to mind,
when I see the word “Worry”.
Erma Bombeck once said, “Worry is like a
rocking chair: it gives you something to do,
but it never gets you anywhere”.
It lets you furiously move around, as if you
are ‘busy’, but it doesn’t get you anywhere.
It only distracts you from being focused on
the job, and only complicates matters…
Remember?
The universe aligning itself?
Worries will only become obstacles and distractions
to the alignment that you are looking for
in the universe!
Try not to worry!
Don’t do dumb things!
There is even a book titled, “Why do smart
people do dumb things?!”
Unfortunately, smart people don’t read that
book!
A rule for everybody else.
A special, different rule, exclusively for
me..!
That is the starting point of the mistake
too many people make!
They think they are special, they think they
are immortal, they think for them, things
will turn out differently.
They think they are lucky.
It could be a simple thing like identifying
an item via Google search, or it could be
something involved and complicated as investing
in a particular stock in the stock market.
You have to realise that the dice are actually
loaded against you.
The house always wins, like they say.
You have to start looking at yourself as an
“average person”..
You could perhaps win.
You could perhaps lose too.
Only then will things start dawning on you.
Too often, we think failure is the stepping
stone for success.
Yes, but only if, after failing, you learn
the right lesson.
Only if you internalise that the failure is
BECAUSE of this action, will you be headed
towards success.
Otherwise, you are going to go to the next,
even worse, failure.
Building character and Making friends — are
two important qualities, says the author.
We have already debated much about Nature
Versus Nurture.
Is it because of birth?
Or because of the environment?
Too many people have now identified that it
is the environment you grow in that has a
much larger, much longer impact on you.
Where you grow?
Who are your friends?
Who are your mentors?
Who influence you?
Who do you get influenced by?
Who are you surrounding yourself with?
Those questions…
Lock yourself up and think through them.
Are you the smartest person in the room?
Remember that?
Do not be!
Avoid blindness, advises the author.
Too often, we identify a mentor, we identify
a Guruji, and we start blindly following them.
They are humans too.
They too are probably fallible.
They can make mistakes too.
And, those mistakes can probably boomerang
on you..!
Have that in mind always!
Don’t follow anything blindly.
And, admit your mistakes.
If you make a mistake, “I have committed
a mistake, this is the lesson I have learned
from it” should be your next step.
That is when people will admire your authenticity
and be attracted to you.
Those are the kinds of friends you need in
the first place.
So, admit your mistakes.
Take care of yourself, and take care of others.
In fact, the ultimate level of taking care
of yourself, is taking care of others.
And, while talking about taking care of the
self, the author stresses much on the importance
of good sleep.
Are you sleeping enough?
Some say six, some say seven, some say nine
hours.
But, are you sleeping enough?
I watched a TED talk recently, it is a very
short one, I watched it just before going
to sleep, .. and the doctor, the lady doctor
comes over and says, “Here are three questions.
Ask yourself what the answer is to these three.
That will determine whether you are sleeping
enough..
1 — Are you reasonably well-rested through
the day?
2 — Are you sleeping through disturbances,
at night?
Or, does a single pin-drop affect your sleep
from that moment on?
3 — Do you stay awake through the day?
Or do you drop off randomly, without control,
at your desk?
If your answer to these three questions are
Yes, Yes, and a resounding Yes, then, don’t
worry about anything else, you are sleeping
enough, she says.
The reason she is bringing these to the fore
is a new disease called Orthosomnia!
We have heard of insomnia, but what’s this
orthosomnia?
Everybody now has a watch tracker on their
wrists.
REM sleep they say.
Deep sleep.
Dreamy sleep.
Disturbed sleep.
Number of hours..
Number of…
This tracking all the way to hell and back?
That itself will affect the quality of your
sleep, she says!
The act of measuring is eating into the quality
of your sleep.
Orthosomnia.
Beware!
He talks about happiness.
Keep laughing!
That is the only thing really in your control!
Don’t think it is not in your control!
He also elaborates further, with a beautiful
experiment researchers conducted many years
ago.
They analysed lottery winners.
How happy they were before the win.
Some sort of average.
What happened after the lottery was announced?
Skyhigh levels!
After that, the researchers go back to these
winners..
Eight / Ten months later.
And they notice that it has gone back to their
average.
A lottery has not affected long term happiness…
At least this is perhaps understandable.
But, look at the second half of their experiment!
A counter-experiment.
In that, they look at people who have become
paralysed.
Perhaps because of an accident.
Or because of a disease.
And, when paralysis hits them, their happiness
hits rockbottom.
Understandably.
But… a similar amount of time later, they
go back and trace the same paralysed people,
and check their happiness level.
Guess what?!
It has gone back to their pre-paralysis average!!
So, irrespective of whether you win the lottery
or lose mobility because of paralysis, what
matters seems to be your inner make up.
What are you made of?
What’s your mindset?
That mindset is the long term average.
So, work on your mind set.
You don’t have control about the lottery,
or about the paralytic attack.
But you have control over your mindset, and
that’s what matters, says the author, with
this beautiful example.
And then he paints this picture.
An island.
Sun.
Surf.
Sand.
Margarita in hand.
For too many people, idiotic people, this
is the vision that comes to mind when asked
“What is your dream destination?”
or “What do you want to be doing in life,
long term?” says Jordan Peterson, author
of 12 Rules for Life.
He calls it the “Lie of your Life”.
Hey, do you think you can stand this one day?
Two days?
One week?
You will start vomiting at the thought of
the margarita.
That’s how bad things can become.
This is not your goal.
Your goal can’t be unadulterated continuous
enjoyment.
It will cease to be enjoyment.
You will want to go back to some meaningful
work.
And, that is what is explained in the Duck
Book quite beautifully.
The author says, “Please understand, you
have to give a duck!
Don’t think you don’t need to.
Don’t think you can escaping having to.
You have to give a duck.
But, what are you going to give it on?
How much?
For what?
That is what is in your hands.
And, you decide that with great care.
Give it a lot of attention.
Choosing what you want to give a duck for…
This is what the author says.
The key to a good life is not giving a duck
about more.
It is giving a duck about less.
Giving a duck about only what is true and
immediate and important.
So, choose the pain!
Not happiness!
Choose the pain that you are ready to tolerate,
that you are ready to probably even enjoy!
There lies the key to happiness.
Embracing change!
This is something we have talked enough about.
The author brings the example of the surfer.
Look at the surfer.
He fails repeatedly.
Here, it is a she.
She fails repeatedly.
Again and again.
But, does it matter?
It doesn’t because she is looking for that
one wave.
She is waiting for it.
She is waiting for that right moment.
And, she can’t wait forever either.
If she doesn’t act at that exact moment
when the crest appears, it will topple her
over.
But, if she catches it at the right moment,
bliss!
She will be taken..
She will be queen, for the next ten / fifteen
seconds.
Riding at the crest of the wave for everybody
to see.
You have to be ready for that special moment.
And, remember, this is going to die down.
If you want to continue flying, you will have
to be ready to catch the next one when it
is about to form.
Curve-jumping, we had read about a while ago.
Curve-jumping is a very important lesson we
learn from the Surfer.
Embrace change.
You can either be ready for change, … or,
you can be the agent of change.
Be the agent of change.
Bring about change.
Think about that.
Learning from experience — we have all learned
this enough.
We understand that we don’t have time in
this life to really live through all its experiences
ourselves.
We need to use curiosity, sometimes.
We could read books and learn, sometimes.
We could identify a good Guruji and continue
our learning.
We could observe the mistakes others do, and
we can learn.
Data and Patterns..
Observing, analysing, drawing insights…
This is a skill they didn’t teach us at
school.
Statistics used to be one of the last chapters
in mathematics at school.
Close to the exam, the maths teacher will
advise us to skip the chapter and focus on
the rest of it, instead.
Today, statistics is even more important.
Somehow, the teacher didn’t touch upon.
I wish we all understand Data Science, the
old wine in new bottle..
We all need to understand a little bit of
this science of analysing and identifying
insights from data.
Mark Twain is supposed to have said, “History
never repeats itself, but it does rhyme!”
What is he trying to say?
Well, he is saying, if something like this
happens once, it won’t necessarily happen
again..
But, when you abstract it one level up, you
will realise that the same thing is happening,
only slightly differently.
It doesn’t repeat itself, but it does rhyme.
So, keep watching and learn from history.
Otherwise you are doomed to suffer, beware!
Having Dreams — that is the last advice
he gives in this book — and, working for
them.
When we travel towards a goal, we think we
run sprints.
We have identified some goal to go towards,
and we go whole hog, all guns blazing, or
that is what we all think.
That is the worst way to start towards a goal,
says the author.
Remember the Atomic Habits?
If you want to run a marathon…
any meaningful goal is a marathon by the way,
nothing is easy, nothing is short term, … if
you want to run a marathon, you don’t start
with your fastest speed.
You start walking.
You practice walking.
You practice keeping up your pace for long
durations.
And then you slowly increase.
And then you get competitive.
That’s how you work towards a goal.
Yuval Noah Harari, in his famous book Sapiens,
he talks about any goal achieved by anybody
being not achieved by that person or by his
family or friends, but by humanity itself.
By the species homo sapiens itself.
Only because somebody some day long ago invented
something, the other guy has been able to
do this, this other lady has been able to
do that, and then, along history, somebody
invented the Printing Press, and then somebody
brought up… that is how the author builds
the chain.
If you are doing something, it is built on…
Newton said that, didn’t he?
“I am able to see farther because I am standing
on the shouder of giants”.
Please retain that respect.
Whatever you do, it is little…
It has to be slow.
Move forward.
It has to be lifelong.
As a closing thought, I wanted to go back
to the title of the book itself.
Life is short..
Is Life Short?
Really?
Is it not enough really?
Paul Graham, the famous Silicon Valley entrepreneur,
thinker, philosopher, has written an article
on this very subject..
Yes, Life is indeed short.
It is just one moment when you miss your baby
standing up for the first time.
Won’t happen again.
It is just twelve months when your baby is
a toddler.
Learning to speak.
It is probably just six times you will decorate
your Christmas tree, with your child really
believing that it is Santa Claus coming in
through the chimney.
It is probably four more times before you
are no longer able to talk to your grandma.
Think about it.
Consider it.
Talk about it.
Life is short..
Do not waste time..
Steve Jobs famously said, “Do not waste
it living somebody else’s plan for you”.
This person, Paul Graham, introduces a Bullshit
meter.
Have this bullshit filter set up around you.
Do not waste time on these things, he says,
and throws a list at us.
Unnecessary meetings.
Worthless conflicts.
Bureaucracy.
Paperwork.
Permissions.
Going up the chain in the hierarchy.
Asking for permissions.
And wondering what to do..
Don’t waste time in all this.
Stop acting for the sake of others, stop putting
up a show!
Stop fixing mistakes committed by other people.
He even mentions the infamous traffic jam.
I think it is important.
Live close to where you work.
Work close to where you live.
It is a special kind of bliss.
It gives you… 27 hours in a day!
Think about it!
And, … he touches upon hobbies and their
addictive impact on lifestyles.
Yes, have a hobby.
Yes, allow yourself to create space.
But, unrewarding and pointless hobbies should
be avoided at all costs.
So, this is going to help you probably lengthen
the short life that you and I are living.
Think about it.
Don’t waste time.
We will meet you soon.
Thank you!